restaurant secret recipes are brought to
you by the pad with the restaurant
program Sunday mornings from 10:00 to
1:00 on AM 680 W RKO Boston we let you
be the food critic and buy Pat's cruises
at Pat's cruises calm
you
- Mike Higgins I'm chef of the old salt
restaurant in Hampton New Hampshire
today we're going to be making a nice
professional clam chowder first of all
you need to start with some great
ingredients before you make your clam
chowder's or anything else for that
matter
we have saw we onions potatoes creamed
clams clam broth these are the clams
that you would buy and you would get at
the your local retail store like 3 ounce
cans you need 12 ounces for my recipe
along with some clam broth fresh parsley
possibly grow outside their own herb
garden here these are types of clams
here that that we purchased for the
restaurant ourselves we get larger cans
because we make it much larger
quantities when we get those clams we
get them whole so we dice them up
ourselves so we get a less consistent
clam in the in the chowder itself which
is great these are what the clams begin
with so this is a cherrystone clam you
know they open them up here and you know
open up the clams and this is the clam
that you see and then they end up whole
clams we get a little larger clam
sometimes and then they dice up here we
get a little less consistent clairement
in the in the chowder which is really
nice you get some big pieces in little
pieces that go all throughout one of the
real secrets to clam chowder is the
cream that you use and this is a local
clean cream from a local farm this is
actually maiden or farmed from Haven New
Hampshire hatchling farms and it's a
pasteurized cream but it's not ultra
pasteurized so you have a much higher
butter fat content and sweeter cream in
it it really enhances the chowder
first we start cooking our bacon and we
take the bacon and we want to cook it on
a medium heat because we don't want to
get any little black chunks or burnt
pieces in there and listen to that you
can almost smell it can't you that's
great and so we'll cook the bacon down
and then we're going to save those
drippings and we're going to cook our
potatoes and onions and celery and stuff
right in that bacon so we'll take this
bacon when we move it from the pan we
can save this bacon for BLT sandwiches
the next day or we can I come lit up put
it right in the chowder that's what we
normally like to do always you know I
get a quarter inch slice of my potatoes
and stuff like that I usually put my
potatoes in first once again you want to
keep this on a nice low heat a nice low
flame because you don't want to get any
burnt pieces in there while that's
cooking and simmering what I'll do is
and I dice up my onions and celery I've
already done that for time here that I
can add my onions and celery that's
beautiful then we are will just saute
that up for a while
keep that on a nice low heat as I said
and we're going to cook that in a low
heat for about 20 minutes we'll let that
cook okay now we sauteed our onions
celery and potatoes for about 20 minutes
they're all nice and tender and cooked
up nice potatoes are still a little firm
but there's still going to be some
cooking once we add the clam broth so
we're going to just add a little butter
in there and let that melt down
beautiful we let that melt in and by
your adding the butter when you add your
clam broth it's not like adding your a
liquid right into your bacon drippings
which would splatter all up so that
helps so quite a bit so then we can add
the clam broth and now we're going to
bring that up to a boil now we can turn
up our heat a little and this is going
to you know help finish cooking the
potatoes and it will help cook those
onions down so you won't even you know
you won't even see and notice those
onions in there but you'll just get that
great flavor get out a little fresh
parsley pinch of black pepper that's
just a taste beautiful stuff I always
have my clams last because they're
already precooked and stuff and I don't
want to get them all all rubbery and
stuff like that so once I once I get
this boiling and I start to thicken this
and when we make this we make just a
base we don't add any of our dairy until
we're actually reheating it for a second
time we get ready to serve it that gives
us a much better shelf life we don't
have to worry about the cream breaking
down or anything like that you do have
to let it sit for a few minutes just so
you can get you know all those flavors
extracted into the cream so we have that
at a nice nice simmer we've been simmer
for about 15 15 minutes it's actually
reduced our clam broth down a little as
well and really enhance the the clam
flavor in it so then I can add a little
a little flour and a couple of spoons of
flour you want it you want to turn this
back down now you want to simmer it
again make sure you get all the lumps
out of the clay out out of the flour
but that will stir in nicely and then
once I once I get that going and I get
that thickens
I will take my clams and I will add my
clams at this point and the clams still
have a lot of juice in them too so
you're actually going to see it's going
to thin it back out a touch but then you
need to just let it simmer for a while
and that will thicken up to a nice nice
paste and you want it nice and thick
almost like a pancake batter or
something like that you're going to mix
it when you get this base you want to
mix it about 50/50 with the cream so now
what I've done is I've transferred my
base and I've got it nice and thick and
this is the consistency you want it I've
transferred into a bigger pot because
I'm going to add the cream to it now and
I'm actually going to double the volume
that I've made you can take this base
and you can you know you can cut it in
half but happen to refrigerator and
it'll hold for a couple weeks easy
because once again you have no dairy
products in there
let's get nice and thick and it'll
continue to thick so we do want to
simmer it you know what once we get this
cream in there and this is once again is
a nice fresh cream it's a New Hampshire
cream beautiful beautiful product
but I'm going to do is I'm going to just
sit here I'm going to let that simmer
now I'm going to really reduce the heat
get it on as low as I can and I'm going
to just heat that up nice and slow in
order to not break the cream I want to
bring it up to about 160 degrees and
it's going to thicken up and you know as
it sits it's going to get a little
thicker and thicker and that's that's a
great great product